okay what what what what in the world is
the rationale for being soft and Iran I
I I don't see a rationale for that at
all I mean Iran is a terrible repressive
theocracy with nuclear Ambitions it's a
dangerous regime so how can you be soft
on Iran what is the biggest way you
easiest way to get into a war in the
Middle East it would be a confrontation
with Iran therefore you can't have a
confrontation with Iran that's the way I
think a lot of people are thinking but I
think the logic of the position is we
have to say we don't want an Iranian
nuclear weapon but actually
if you're given a binary choice between
a war with Iran with the U.S fighting
Iran to keep it from being not nuclear
and then or just hoping that if they get
a nuclear weapon we can deter them and
Israel can deter them like everybody
else's with nuclear weapons has been
deterred they would say better let them
have the bomb than have the War I think
that's the the logic of the position and
that the Iranians smelling that as the
logic of the position have taken a very
tough line in negotiations and at this
point our con are continuing to press
the Biden Administration that's what I
think has probably happened
[Music]
hello everyone I met Mr Walter Russell
Mead at a dinner party in Washington
he's a prolific author and a columnist
for the Wall Street Journal of very
astute commentator on Foreign Affairs
I'm talking to him today about well
about the situation the international
situation in the world as as experienced
by the United States and its Western
allies let's say we talk about we're
going to talk about Russia and China and
Iran and Israel and Palestine all the
what would you call it predictable
villains and uh so Mr Walter Russell
Mead is a writer professor in academic
focusing his efforts as I said on
International policy and Foreign Affairs
he is the James Clark Chase professor of
Foreign Affairs and Humanities at Bard
College and taught U.S foreign policy at
Yale
Mead has worked as a columnist for
Publications such as the Wall Street
Journal and was editor at large for the
American interest his books include
mortal Splendor special Providence power
Terror peace and War God and gold and
most recently 2022 the Ark of a covenant
so Mr Mead you've spent an awful lot of
time thinking about foreign policy in in
very many different aspects not
concentrating necessarily on any
particular part of the world but taking
as much as it's possible a relatively
global view and so maybe we could start
our discussion by having you
summarize what you think are the most
important what are the most important
issues that confronted the United States
and the Western World more generally
on the on the Foreign Relations front in
2022 and maybe we can also talk about
what you see happening in in 2023 as we
move forward what what's currently
besetting Us in the West on the foreign
policy front
well it's a you know this is a really
difficult time
the
it's important maybe to help people get
what's happening in the world is to
realize sort of what the basic framework
of world politics is and that is that
beginning about 300 years ago the
British began to build this sort of
global commercial order
where there's trade there's Commerce and
the British also were concerned for
creating balance of power in Europe and
developing their power globally so that
this commercial Maritime system would
develop the Americans more or less
inherited or some would say took over
that system at the end of World War II
and this liberal International Maritime
commercial system of trade of power of
political relationships is the dominant
reality in World politics
and the world is is more or less divided
between countries that are
fairly happy with this with this system
and would like to see it continue
countries who have some grievances would
like the system adjusted but are
basically willing to work within that
system
and then countries who want to bring the
whole thing down
and today the the leading countries that
are that are in that are there's a you
know China Russia and Iran along with
certain smaller Hangers On like
Venezuela Cuba Nicaragua and a few
others
and we've seen since uh you know at the
end of the Cold War 1990 it looked as if
this
anglo-american system would last forever
people talked about the end of History
but partly because countries like China
have developed and become more powerful
but maybe more fundamentally because the
Americans and our close allies have not
done a very good job of understanding
how to build and nurture and maintain
this system we've seen gradually a kind
of a of a crisis of opposition
approaching and 2022 between the Russian
invasion of Ukraine
uh China's
um uh continued sort of menacing of
Taiwan and Iran's progress refusal to
rejoin the jcpoa uh it's it's deepening
alliance with Russia we've seen this
Alliance of revisionist powers assemble
themselves for a real challenge to this
International System
well so let's maybe we could walk
through each of those countries in turn
I mean the first uh reaction I have to
what you said is that
say what you might about the
anglo-american sphere of influence it's
by no means self-evident that either
China Russia or Iran stand out as
shining moral lights to emulate as an
alternative I mean China is a
desperately terrible totalitarian
communist state Iran is basically uh
islamo fascist regime and while Russia
seems to be the outlier to some degree
but
um you know because at least nominally
it could be allied with the west but it
certainly uh
proved extremely problematic in new ways
since the end of the Cold War so
I mean on what grounds can countries
like China and Iran for example offer
anything even remotely like an
alternative to the sphere of
anglo-american domination let's start
with China
right well you know China offers
what China offers countries or at least
did offer because its offering has
gotten less attractive with between the
mounting totalitarianism the economic
trouble that they're in and their
reaction to covet they were saying look
you don't have to buy the Western
package in order to become rich and
Powerful
and furthermore they were saying to
somebody like the ruler of a country
like Zimbabwe or other countries will
give you money will give you Tech we
won't ask you any questions about how
much money your brother-in-law is making
out of the deal no pesky Auditors we
will you know we're not like the
anglo-americans we won't try to make you
behave we'll let you do is it will
Empower you to do exactly as you like
now that is not a positive agenda for an
alternative world order but it is an
offer that a lot of governments or a lot
of powerful individuals might find
attractive yeah powerful and powerful
and corrupt individuals I mean it's for
okay so let's take that apart a little
bit so the first part of that is the
proposition that you can actually be
wealthy or let's say have abundant
resources and a reasonable standard of
living living for your citizens not for
you without adopting something like the
underlying metaphysics of the western
moral code and that proposition strikes
me as highly improbable given that the
only reason that China is Rich at all is
because it managed to integrate itself
with the west and essentially adopt
quasi-capitalist principles without
actually adopting the underlying
metaphysic and I don't think their
system is stable I don't think they're
going to be able to propagate that
well-being into the future I mean you
said yourself that China has tilted very
heavily under ji towards an increasing
totalitarianism and that's pretty much
self-evident and the fact that they can
only peddle their Wares with regards to
um what would you say their
profitability on the dictator front to
corrupt governments also indicates the
moral bankruptcy of their offerings so
if what if what China has to offer is
the ability to bring together you know
the corrupt dictators of the world that
doesn't seem like a very plausible or
sustainable alternative to
anglo-american domination right so and
and well I mean China seems to be facing
a whole host of problems now too
including demographic problems that are
deadly serious
right well you know Jordan this this
anglo-american order is 300 years old
and a lot of people have tried to shake
it over the centuries you know you can
go back to Louis XIV in France who said
I'm going to have this centralized
powerful planned economy we're going to
be it we're going to have all the
economic and military power of the
British but we're not going to have all
that messy political liberalism and it
didn't work but he put up a good fight
that convulsed the world for many years
Napoleon really exactly the same
challenging that
anglo-american still at that time
British World Order and saying my
dictatorship my enlightened dictatorship
can create a powerful economy that the
the stupid British cannot match and an
army that they can't defeat and he
rampaged for quite a while he did
ultimately fall apart and rightly so
I think Kaiser Wilhelm II I think uh
Hitler Tojo and Stalin all in their
different ways had the same idea that
the sort of technocratic dictatorship
centralized power and planning could
challenge create an economy in a society
that could challenge this anglo-american
hegemony this or called the liberal
World System
and they've they all failed but that you
know no they all thought okay I learned
from the past now I'll win and I think
China is thinking along those lines too
yeah well I think I think there's a a
fallacy at the bottom of that
presumption
that basically is biological in nature I
mean one of the things I've observed
as a consequence of watching the United
States as an outsider let's say for 50
years 50 conscious years let's say is
that
diversity of approach beats efficiency
of Monolithic View and so what I always
see happening in the United States is
while you guys are crazy about 80
percent of the time and going off the
rails in five different directions but
there's always someone in the United
States doing something crazily
Innovative insane always and so what
seems to happen is that the U.S washes
up against the shores of various forms
of political idiocy but there's so much
diversity of approach in the U.S
especially given its massive population
and its Federated system and it's and
it's genuine freedoms that someone
somewhere is doing the next right thing
and then America is what would you call
it
um open-minded enough and adaptive
enough so that if someone is doing the
right thing then they spawn imitators
extremely rapidly and Americans just
capitalize on that like mad and you get
this situation where you could imagine
and I think the Japanese managed this
for a while you could imagine that if
you just happen to stumble on the right
Vision if you were an efficient and
benevolent totalitarian you could be
more effective over like a five-year
period but you're going to have a hell
of a time with power transitions that's
a deadly problem and then if the world
shifts on you that's not in in a way
that isn't commensurate with your
ideological Vision then you have no
alternative approaches to rely on and my
observation has be not just scuttles all
these countries that try to compete with
this distributed and creative
free anglo-american ethos and I do think
there's a biological reason for that is
that you know one of the ways that
biological systems compute adaptation is
by producing a very large variety of
mutations right of of variant Offspring
and most of those Offspring perish but
the only solution to that problem of
excess mortality let's say on the
biological front is the provision of
multiple variants and the anglo-american
system because it's distributed and
because it places a substantial amount
of power in the hands of of individuals
and subsidiary organizations it's medium
to long-term creativity simply can't be
beat and it is inefficient in that it's
you know a lot of the variants that the
U.S produces a lot of businesses and so
forth fail but those that succeed can
succeed spectacularly and that happens
continually and that seems like an
Unstoppable force and you know you just
outlined 300 years of History showing
that these monolithic centralists who
believe that Central planning and
efficiency will defeat distributed
creativity they just they're just wrong
one after the other you'd think
eventually we learned that that was just
wrong and maybe we have to some degree
yeah well I think the the circle is
spreading of countries or cultures and
individuals who do see this Advantage
but as again as a student of History
rather than biology or or uh psychology
what I see is that we keep having these
wars and so you know I can say I
actually do believe the Chinese system
the Russian system in its own way the
Iranian system certainly cannot really
continue as as they wish and will fail
in the competition I look at the
devastation that we've seen the
Napoleonic Wars the world wars and so
our problem on our side is not simply to
wait for the time when our diversity and
our Innovation will will clearly Triumph
but we have to try to manage or work in
foreign policy and and security policy
to to try to prevent new sort of new
catastrophic War is on the scale even
though the chances are pretty good that
we will prevail in the end right right
right well it looks to me right now on
the Chinese front I mean they're they're
experiencing a level of domestic unrest
that for China appears to be somewhat
unprecedented and it seems to me that
it's
perhaps clearly in the interest of the
Chinese authorities to do something like
saber rattle extremely hard over Taiwan
to divert their populace's attention
from their domestic failures and so that
strikes me as a I mean maybe I'm being
pessimistic about it although obviously
lots of people are concerned about China
and Taiwan I mean
G seems to be attempting to consolidate
power in the same manner as people like
Mao he's turned out to be a real a real
totalitarian dictator rather than
someone who's you know moving China
maybe like doubt like
um the the Chinese leader who modernized
uh was Adele what's his name um
yes exactly he doesn't seem like another
dungsho ping he seems to be more like
another Mao and that that's very
worrisome on the Taiwan front so what do
you what do you think's in the on the
horizon on the China front and what do
you think the West should do about it
right no it's it's it's really
interesting because from the Chinese
point of view
first of all we have to understand that
the people that people like I and and
you would talk to from China are not
aren't representative of the mass of the
Chinese in China the average China
Chinese person has never left China
didn't study for years in a in the
English-speaking world of an American or
Canadian University or what have you
um you know and for them it it looks
very frustrating they see China as this
great nation with a growing economy
largest population in the world at least
until India catches up and then they
look and they see look at Iran a tiny
country backwards in many ways compared
to China which has been running the
table in the Middle East you know it's
in Syria it's in Lebanon it's in Yemen
it's causing problems everywhere you
look even Russia has gotten Crimea and
has achieved things where has the
Chinese government gotten you know what
is it done the answer is it's done less
than Iran done less than China sorry
than Russia in terms of expanding so I
think the there's pressure on the
Chinese government from a lot of Chinese
public opinion why aren't you more
effective if we're as great as you're
telling us why don't the foreigners see
that and give ground to us
so there's a clash between
what a lot of Chinese people think
China's place in the world should be and
what they actually see and the
government as you say at this time of
huge stress their coveted policy they
locked them down for years and now
they're still having a massive epidemic
they um
the the housing market which is where
most Chinese have their savings and
investment house prices have been going
down for almost three years there's a
major crisis building financially in
China and so the government is in a real
pickle as to what does it do next and
that makes it obviously that makes it a
little bit unpredictable internationally
well so well I was just curious as to
your evaluation of the Biden
administration's response to the
situation in Taiwan do you what opinions
do you have about the Biden formulation
of China of foreign policy in
relationship to China look I think
um the Biden Administration has done a
reasonably good job so far in terms of
its messaging on Taiwan and on the U.S
China relations the chip act and it's
you know it's putting economic pressure
it it is trying to stop the penetration
you know so much of Chinese growth has
really come from the theft of Ip and
from intellectual property from uh
Chinese State subsidies to corporations
you know in key sectors that are able to
use those subsidies to compete unfairly
in the rest of the world and that we are
beginning to see and this you know it
started in the Trump years and even
President Obama talked about a pivot to
Asia so there's been a growing awareness
in the U.S on a need to focus more on
China and not just sort of sit here and
wait for capitalism to turn China
democratic which is what we were maybe
doing 20 years ago so we're definitely
ahead on that front
[Music]
with the start of the New Year upon us
what better time than now to start
building a habit of Prayer just like
physical exercise daily spiritual
exercise is critical to your well-being
especially in a world where attacks on
faith and religion are happening all
around us every day
hallow the number one Christian Prayer
app in the U.S and the number one
Catholic app in the world helps you
maintain a daily prayer routine
it's filled with studies meditations and
Reflections including the number one
Christian podcast the Bible in a year
download the app for free and hallow.com
Jordan you can set prayer reminders
invite others to pray with you and track
your progress along the way
make this year your year for spiritual
growth and peace
get an exclusive three-month free trial
at hallow.com Jordan that's hallow.com
Jordan
so since I was a young person what's
happened in China well first of all
when I started to become politically
aware let's say back in the 1970s I
remember going to a Trade Fair in
Edmonton Alberta it was one of the first
trade fairs that the Chinese
participated in not probably about 1974
something like that and we went and
looked at uh the Chinese had a display
there of their Industrial Products and
it looked like stuff that had been
manufactured in the west right after the
second world war like it looked like
stuff that was built in the 1950s but
that was the first time in my lifetime
that we saw anything at all of China and
then of course when I was very young
uh the threat of famine was still
something that we associated with China
and what I've seen happen in my lifetime
is that China has become an economic
Powerhouse that the threat of famine has
receded substantially that the Chinese
had been integrated at least to some
degree into the world economy that the
West had benefited arguably from an
influx of unbelievably inexpensive
consumer goods as Chinese manufacturing
quality improved as it did in Japan and
for a good while it looked like the
Chinese were going to settle in beside
us in lockstep even though as
competitors and Cooperators and move us
all towards a relatively integrated
capitalist future and of course the
presumption was that as that happened
that the state would liberalize not
least because there would be all sorts
of individuals in China who now had a
certain degree of economic power and you
know that the Chinese would
incrementally transform into essentially
into allies playing under the same
system and I think that really was
happening
in a pretty damn optimistic way for a
number of decades till she decided to
centralize control and turn himself into
another Mao and it isn't obvious that
the optimism that the West had in
relationship to China was exactly
misplaced I mean I think the Western
working Clause paid a big price for
integrating China but other than that
you know the Chinese aren't starving
anymore which is certainly a big plus
and like there were a lot of positives
to attempting to integrate the Chinese
into the world economy the downside was
we seem to become more dependent on
their largesse and Goodwill than we
needed to and then of course China as a
totalitarian model is a destabilizing
force in the international order well
you're absolutely right and I I would
agree with you completely that well look
you know until a few years ago I would
travel pretty freely in China and a
couple of my books have been translated
into Chinese and I would speak at
Chinese universities and talk with
professors and and officials and the
view that you just expressed is was very
common this is what they felt China was
doing and should do was move toward this
kind of integration to become what some
Chinese used to tell me a normal country
is what they wanted China to become
and I think there are a lot of people
there who still hope that obviously
they're they're not going to say so
right now that would that would not be
good for you or your family if you
started talking that way but there I
think the what happened in some ways is
we've we tended to forget that the
Chinese Communist party is a real thing
and it wants to hold right power you
know and there are lots of people who
see you know they look at Chinese
history yes the Communist party has
killed more Chinese than anything ever
in the history of the world have died as
a result of Mao's famines and other
things far eclipsing the death toll say
in their war against Japan even but
that said as you've pointed out the the
economic growth of the last 30 35 years
in China is one of the great miracles of
human history yeah and you would you
would have to have a Heart of Stone not
to be glad that hundreds of millions of
people have come out of poverty that a
new new ways of life are opening up new
access to culture to education it's it's
what life what we should all be doing
it's it's progress and it's good right
but that very progress of the society I
think terrified the Communist Party
because they could see themselves losing
control they could see you know and and
there is in Chinese history and culture
you know it's a it's a country of a
billion four people that's like what
four times the population of the
European Union
and it's not so easy to Chinese history
is a story of the balance between
central and local governments they've
had periods of division and War and
weakness when others have taken
advantage when the central government
was weak so instead of in a way relaxing
and liberalizing more as their Economic
Policy succeeded many in the Chinese
Communist Party became you know really
worried that things were things were
going to get out of control
and for a number of years even before we
saw the um you know the international
hostility what we saw was gradually in
sector after sector they were tightening
up the control of this Central communist
Elite and more and more under one man Xi
Jinping they were tightening every using
every lever they could to impose uniform
uniformity in China to reassert even in
companies now every company has to have
a Communist Party sell in it
so the part where we're back to the kind
of Communist party yes exactly and
obviously as a western investor that's a
tough thing when you've got the
Communist Party cell running your
company you do you really own the
company Etc so it's a yeah right right
so so they're they're moving I think
from a good period into a much more
difficult one I think
right well I think also that people were
optimistic and rightly so after 1989
because once the Soviets gave up the
ghost it looked for a pretty long period
of time that you couldn't beat the
Communist drum very hard anymore that
the internal contradictions that were
part and parcel of the ethos had made
themselves manifest in a manner that was
utterly unmistakable and just as the
Soviet Union collapsed under the weight
of its own internal idiocy so was the
Chinese Communist Party doomed to
eventual failure and it certainly and
now but I guess part of the problem is
that even in the west you know we don't
seem to be of one mind when we look at
the contradiction between Western
productivity and generosity let's say
and general well-being at the level of
the citizen and the contradictions
between that and a radical leftist view
of the world
right I mean our own our own Society is
Rife with this culture War predicated at
least on the part that capitalism is
inherently oppressive and well and so is
Western culture in general and
of course the Chinese Communists believe
that in Spades and if we can't get our
own house in order with regards to the
Pathology of these ideas in the West in
some sense it's not that surprising that
the Chinese remain dominated by them but
but the long-term consequences of that
can't be good I mean what I see
happening I think in in the West in the
U.S in particular is that people are
losing faith in China as a trading
partner and we're starting to pull back
a tremendous amount of manufacturing
capacity and decreasing investment and
pulling away from China as a trading
partner and of course that'll just make
things more desperate in China which is
not a good thing
yeah it's it's a tricky thing we in the
west we read 1989 and the events in the
Soviet Union as a you know a glorious
Victory but in China and and Putin is is
on their wavelength here they saw it
very differently what they saw is
it look at the Soviet Union Gorbachev
tried to to liberalize and to introduce
some democratic elements into the Soviet
Union and look what happened the Soviet
Union fell apart Russia was impoverished
for a decade it lost its great power
status in the world and you know and the
West as they saw it in Russia and in
China just you know sort of walked all
over them and did whatever it wanted and
so and the Iranians saw this too so the
message for these leaders is don't
liberalize
liberalism is a poison and even a little
bit of it can begin to corrode and
destroy your society and if you let it
in it will wreck your power and
devastate everything
so there they actually became they they
did not say oh how enchanting Western
democracy is they said how dangerous it
is
and we've heard Putin complain and talk
about the color revolutions different
liberalizing Revolutions in post-soviet
countries and they see us they see the
West as leading this kind of subversion
and that Western ideas and Western
freedoms are a fundamental threat to
their own power and given the uses some
of them have made of that power made to
their personal survival right right well
that seems like a reasonable concern for
totalitarian for ideologically Motivated
totalitarian dictators it's definitely
the case that Western liberal ideals
will not provide an environment where
they're kind of Psychopathic power
playing is going to be successful so
they have every reason to be intimidated
by that right and I think our mistake
was not to realize that you know we were
saying hey we're not you know we're
going to wait patiently for China to
evolve
but
on the side of the Chinese Communist
party they were saying well we're not
just going to wait patiently until
liberalism comes in and wrecks us we're
going to preemptively do what we need to
do to maintain our power
so I think well maybe we should have
known that because they never wavered in
their support for North Korea that's
right and they were also very careful
always to say we want economic
liberalization not political
liberalization
yeah yeah as if those that well okay so
let's concentrate on that a little bit
so it's it's not obvious to me at all
that you get to have economic
liberalization without political
liberalization in fact I think the order
of
of of events in that in that causal link
is reversed is that the reason that we
have abundance and material prosperity
in the west is because of liberalism
liberalism isn't the consequence of
wealth it's the precondition for wealth
and you can think about that
particularly with regards to such things
as the right to private property and the
right to the fruits of your own labor if
your Society isn't predicated on the
idea that the individual is somehow
intrinsically worthwhile and Sovereign
in that manner that's not merely a gift
of the state but something intrinsic to
the person as soon as you have that you
have at least in principle an inviolable
right to something approximating private
property unto the fruits of your own
labor and without that fundamental
presumption which I think most
particularly is a judeo-christian
Biblical presumption the whole
capitalist Enterprise and it's because
it's so reliant on trust and honesty as
well for example to really flourish and
on the right of private property it's
just a non-starter and so this is a this
is a favorite shibboleth of the West is
that well we can have all this economic
Prosperity or even more of it with a
centralized top-down control system
that's predicated on the idea of
equality but in reality that never seems
to pan out and so and I don't I mean you
could point to regimes maybe like
Singapore as a potential exception but
Singapore isn't very old and so we'll
see how it does with regards to such
things as power transitions but the idea
that you can have economic progress
without that underlying ethos of
individual sovereignty I don't think
there's any historical evidence for that
at all and and there's plenty of
evidence to the contrary you describe
that in terms of the constant failure of
the dictator States you know it's
interesting uh is that
I mean I I think you're right
and that the you know sort of human
nature exists in such a way that this
kind that private property and those the
culture of individual rights together is
honesty is a is foundation for greater
Prosperity but
the foundations of of different cultures
around the world have a very different
relationship to that set of ideas
and you know I remember the first time I
started traveling in Russia it was still
the Soviet Union uh one of the I'm I'm
giving away how old I am I suppose but
one of the things I noticed there was
that Marxism was was culturally
attractive to a lot of people in Russia
because there was a deep distrust of
economic exchange that the people kind
of intuitively felt that if you at least
this is the way it seemed to me that if
a if a merchant went into the
countryside and bought a bushel of wheat
for five rubles from the farmer and then
took it into town and sold it for 10
rubles to the consumers in the in the
town he was cheating somebody you know
maybe he was treating the farmer maybe
he was cheating his customers but that
this kind of exchange was fundamentally
morally illegitimate and so there was so
Marxism felt felt right in his you know
that that capitalism was by Nature
exploitative a lot of people were
induced to believe that yeah well that
it's easy it's easy for that belief to
be induced because it can capitalize on
envy and envy is a deadly sin let's say
um and it's easy to become envious of
anyone who seems to have something that
you don't have especially if you don't
like look at the other person's life in
totality you see one feature in their
life that in some manner exceeds what
you've been able to manage and then it's
it's also extremely convenient for you
to assume that if someone has exceeded
you in a particular dimension of
attainment that the reason they did that
is because they're corrupt and
malevolent not because they're useful
and productive compared to you and so
one of the psychological advantages that
envious Marxism has is that it it plays
to Envy in a an extremely uh Power
powerful Manner and the problem with
that seems to be and maybe this is
another principle for economic
advancement if your Society is
predicated on the idea that all
difference in attainment or
socioeconomic status is a consequence of
theft and exploitation then basically
you set up a situation where no one can
ever have anything more than anyone else
in which case you have no basis for
trade whatsoever and you certainly can't
generate anything approximating wealth
because there's just no way that
everyone can become equally Rich at the
same instantaneous moment there's always
going to be a gradation of distribution
and one of the weird things the West has
managed and this has something to do
with that implicit trust is that we've
actually managed to develop a society
where there's not only tolerance for
inequality but there's a certain degree
of admiration for it right I mean and I
think this is particularly true of the
US where it's less true of Canada and
Europe but one of the things that's
always struck me so positively about the
U.S is that there is a general sense of
admiration among the populace for people
who've been able to achieve
spectacularly and singularly in some
domain and some of that's associated
with the desire in the U.S that parents
have for their children to be able to
perhaps accomplish the same thing but it
really is quite the miracle that any
society has ever managed out at all you
know it's interesting in some Dimensions
even in the Soviet Union you could see
that because if you went to a concert in
the Soviet Union no classical music was
a big thing
the admiration that people felt for a
great violinist or a great dancer was
extraordinary because in every other
channel of life it was utterly corrupted
by the party if you had a good job it
was because the Communist Party gave it
to you if you you know if if you were a
factory director it was because your
brother-in-law was the party commissar
something like that but in the Arts you
know that violinist is just up there
playing it you hear it
and that gives you
um you know so there was this direct
contact with Excellence so the human
spirit I think does instinctively
respond to you know Excellence with
admiration they weren't thinking let's
go break his fingers you know he plays
better than the others so he should like
lose a finger and then he won't play any
better than anybody else but in this in
the realm of Economics no they you know
they had a very different View
much
whether you're selling footballs or fine
art Shopify simplifies selling online
and in person so that you can focus on
growing your business Shopify covers
every sales channel from an in-person
POS system to an all-in-one e-commerce
platform it even helps you sell across
social media marketplaces like Tick Tock
Facebook and Instagram
you don't need to be a designer to know
how to code shopify's industry leading
tools give you complete control over
your business and your brand 24 7
support and an extensive Business course
Library are available to support you
every step of the way Shopify is the
e-commerce platform revolutionizing
millions of businesses worldwide if
you're ready to get serious about
selling try Shopify today sign up for a
one dollar per month trial period at
shopify.com jbp all lowercase go to
shopify.com jbp to take your business to
the next level today that's shopify.com
jbp
well let's turn our attention to the
Russians a little bit so we know or
we've sketched out in a low resolution
sense what's driving uh react the
reactionary Chinese and that's a
reversion to the communist model and to
the totalitarian state that it enables
and that's being driven by the people
who are benefiting from that enabling
that seems relatively clear the Russian
front is a lot more complicated because
it's not obvious at all that Putin is a
communist for example and I know that
Dugan who is who's Putin's favorite
philosopher has been trying to sketch
out something approximating a different
ethos for the Russians and I know that
some of that actually has its Origins
both in Dostoevsky and solzhenitson who
both proclaimed in various ways that the
proper Reign forward for Russia was a
return to something like its incremental
progression along the Orthodox Christian
path and I I think the Russians are
struggling with that to some degree and
Dugan has tried to outline an
alternative ethos but I don't see
anything coherent coming out of that
except antipathy to the progressive
liberal excesses of the West I don't see
that the Russians have actually managed
to elaborate anything approximately
giving a vision and so what do you
think's driving the Russians
yeah I think you know it's um
there is a tragic sense of of History
um
you know you Russian history has been a
a bitter thing Putin is not a communist
he is
um he's if anything he's a tsarist he's
a he's a Russian Nationalist and you
know he actually hates the Communists
because Lenin and uh you know Lennon's
nationality policy really destroyed the
Russian Empire in some ways by creating
this artificial Soviet Union rather than
the the Empire the transfer of Crimea to
Ukraine under Khrushchev was the kind of
you know communist BS that Putin really
loved what but there is something Putin
deeply envies and little misses in in
Russia today which is that the Communist
Party had an uh for most of its history
had an ideological hold in Russia it had
a network of loyal informants and
co-workers and members so there would be
somebody on every block
watching what everyone else did and
Reporting the bad guys to this
suspicious activity to the secret police
and through the network of Communist
Party cells youth organizations this
whole culture the government had measure
means to control shape public opinion
Putin doesn't have that okay the he he's
trying with Russian nationalism with the
Orthodox Church he's trying to find and
of course in places where
um most of the Russian citizens are
Muslim he tries to work through Islamic
religious authorities remember that the
Orthodox church and the Muslim
hierarchies were entirely controlled by
the KGB under the Communists so when the
Soviet Union collapsed all the KGB hacks
and Stooges were in place now of course
there were some sincere Believers here
and there but you know but and so the
and so there was black male material
ways that you could control the Orthodox
Church ways you control and Putin has
tried to turn that into an instrument of
State Control now you know that's not
that's not as illegitimate in some ways
in Russian culture as it might seem to
some of us because the Orthodox Church
in its theology was always much more
supportive of the Tsar the the emperor
it you know it comes out of the
Byzantine tradition where uh so there's
a kind of some people use the phrase
Cesaro papism you know that the the
Caesar the emperor is a holy figure as
well
so it you know they've got a they've it
it comports in some ways with the
tradition with traditional Russian ideas
but Russian Society changed a lot in the
last hundred years
you know the Russia was a peasant
Society in 1920 and today it's mostly an
urban Society Etc it's in many many
different ways it's changed and so Putin
does not have the ideological elements
of control the other problem for Putin
is that Russian Orthodoxy and Russian
nationalism don't export the way Marxism
leninism did at the height of Communism
Stalin could count on the fanatical
loyalty of even highly placed spies like
algerhis in America and Kim philby in
England who out of loyalty to Communism
would be willing agents and Stooges for
Stalin Putin doesn't have that
he's hoping with his opposition to you
know some of the crazy things that are
definitely going on here he and Orban
and some others are sort of trying to
kind of create a sort of conservative
traditionalist International that can do
for them what the international
Communists used to do for Stalin but it
doesn't it's it's it's not going to work
that way it's a much weaker position but
Putin is doing what he can with the
tools he can find to make Russia a great
power you know I think partly it's
weaker because if you try to Ally
Christian theology with the idea of a
centralized quasi-fascist state it
actually doesn't work out very well
because there's such a strong emphasis
on individual sovereignty and individual
worth in the judeo-christian tradition
that you're you're fighting a pretty
vicious rear guard action I mean it was
definitely the case that when the Bible
was printed and distributed so that
everyone one could read it in the
original that what happened was people
recognized their own intrinsic worth and
were much more likely to what would you
say take on both the the rights and the
responsibilities of informed citizenry
as soon as they became literate and
could understand the implications of
that tradition and so it isn't obvious
to me at all that Putin is going to be
able to manage to Shanghai the Christian
tradition into alliance with the idea
that he should be something
approximating a czar even if the
progressive West has you know aired in
its excesses which it which it certainly
has the story just doesn't seem to have
a lot of power I mean it's definitely
the case the Eastern Europeans are quite
appalled by the Western turn towards
this radical progressivism but that
hasn't driven them into the arms of
people like Putin no exactly this is a
very you know again there was a very
Russian tradition of the Tsar as almost
leader of the church as well as the
leader of the state
but it doesn't and and the concept of
rights as we understand them to be
implanted in the judeo-christian
tradition was much more minimized in the
in the old Russian Orthodox Vision it
was a much more collectivist kind of
faith and so the and and the gap between
Orthodox Europe and both Protestant and
Catholic Europe is a very deep
historical when it's over a thousand
years old
but um so Putin put something that works
in Russia at least for a time is is not
exportable in the way Putin would like
it to be now he has another option which
he works with which is this
free-floating you know so Putin will try
on the one hand to be the champion of
the uh you know the people who are in
revolt against the progressive excesses
of the west but at the same time he
wants to pick up the other source of
Soviet support
anti-capitalism
anti-western individualism you know the
far left
and as those are the two things that
Putin is working with and in U.S
politics it's interesting that you get
people you know the the uh the squad
tends to be very skeptical of U.S policy
in Ukraine as do people on the very far
right now there are a lot of legitimate
questions you can ask about what we are
and aren't doing in Ukraine but this
kind of sympathy
quasi-putinous sympathy you will find it
among anti-americans on the left as well
as among sort of some traditionalists on
the right
and that's that's Putin Putin doesn't
care you know for him he'll use he'll
use any tool he can find and that's
that's how he sees these people not as
allies and partners but as tools to be
used to achieve his end which is first
last and always Russian state power what
do you think his goal was in the Ukraine
when I when I looked at what was
happening I thought two things I thought
well
three things I suppose Putin wasn't very
happy with Western expansionism into
Ukraine
um he also was more than willing to
extend Russian Dominion especially in
the Eastern parts of Ukraine and then I
also thought it's possible that he
didn't really care in some fundamental
sense whether Ukraine emerged from this
conflict devastated as long as it didn't
fall into the hands of the west but I'm
still relatively unclear about what his
motivations and vision were for The
Invasion I mean do you think he thought
it would be a cakewalk like so many
military leaders tend to presume when
they when they March into a foreign
country or what was up what was Putin
exactly imagining U.S intelligence also
thought he was going to win
you know the Americans were saying to
zielinski will give you a plane so you
can escape
and we were telling the ambassadors of
all the countries leave leave the
Russians are coming there was a panic
all right so our message to Putin by the
way was not a message of deterrence it
was a message of encouragement we think
our intelligence is terrific and it
tells us you're going to win if you do
this
so you know that's that's interesting I
think he did think he would he would get
a lot of success very quickly but as to
the the threat of Ukraine to Putin it's
not like Western it's not that like
there might be Western troops in Kiev
it's clear we don't want to invade
Russia no one in the west wants to
invade Russia no one there's no support
in the United States for sending an army
into Russia right that is that's not on
the table but what is on the table is
suppose Ukraine
democratizes and becomes a successful
country
Putin's whole argument to the Russian
people is that oh you know democracy may
work fine for the English and the French
and the Americans but we Russians we're
different we Orthodox Slavs we have our
own tradition in our own world
Kiev really is where Russian Civil the
birthplace of Russian civilization
Ukraine for Russians is part of their
Heartland and if Ukrainian Slavs
Orthodox Ukrainian Slavs are happy and
prosperous in a democracy and achieving
things that a corrupt stagnant sterile
putinous regime is unable to achieve in
Russia a happy Democratic Ukraine
without lifting a finger without sending
a single shot across the frontier is a
mortal threat to Putin's power and
vision at home
that's the problem okay so does that
make does that make a devastated Ukraine
and a Russian withdrawal a Putin Victory
I think yet Putin wants Ukraine to fail
he want and he wants to be seen to be
dominant in Ukraine those are the two
things he needs and and the minimal
minimal grounds for victory for him yeah
and Crimea okay so so okay so now what
do you see
we don't know how the Russia Ukraine war
is going to continue I mean the Russians
have been being pushed back but they're
unbelievably heavily armed in the final
analysis and it isn't obvious exactly
what a Ukrainian Victory would look like
in the face of that ultimately
overwhelming let's say nuclear threat
and so it I've I've heard red let's say
uh intimations that potent might be
willing to sit at the bargaining table
now what what do you think are we in for
a long War are we in for a long
deteriorating War that's moving to a
nuclear exchange is Putin feeling
pressure to get to the negotiating table
um what what's your sense of where
things how things are going to unfold
over the next year well I think we're uh
we're in back the war has gone through
several phases already and it's
important to remember it's been so long
since we were all thinking about a big
war in this way we've all forgotten some
of the things that are normal in Warfare
um and one of them is that war changes
so like in World War II you start with
10 months of zits Creek no one is doing
anything then Hitler conquers everything
and oh my gosh he's going to win but
then another stalemate Etc it changes
and in this war there was the initial
phase of Russian attacks and people for
a while thought those might succeed then
the Ukrainian defeat then we went into
that long period of like slow grinding
Russian advances then there were the
heartening Ukrainian
pushback and everybody said ah their
whole Russian army could disintegrate
Etc they seem at least for now to have
stabilized their front we don't really
know and with the missile attacks and
Russia you know fighting on the
boundaries are we back to grinding War
of Attrition or because you know the
morale in the Russian army is quite low
in some places you know could we see
more military collapses like we saw you
know on the Russian side
Etc
so there's a lot going on both the
ukrainians and the Russians still think
they have some cards to play and neither
one is willing to give up until they
they don't think they could gain
something extra by trying something else
so both now you know the West is saying
to zielinski come on at least look like
you want to talk piece so he says you
know I'm ready to sit down you know and
discuss peace on the following terms
basically complete Russian withdrawal
and reparations and Putin also feeling
some internal pressure to and from some
others to sound at least look like he's
interested in pieces yes I'm interested
I want peace talks on the surrender of
Ukraine to me and on exactly what pieces
of Ukraine I'll take
but neither side at this point is is
ready to stop fighting so I I don't see
immediately much change and and both and
and the future will be determined by how
the armies do on the ground the god of
battles will determine where we are and
then in the you know as the reality
changes the two sides appreciation of
what they can reasonably hope to achieve
change and at some point maybe there
will be we'll see you know a negotiated
peace
right but you think there's a fair bit
of War to come before right there
because it isn't obvious that either
side is losing in some fundamental sense
right it's still very ambivalent each
side has reasons to believe that it can
gain from where it is now and as long as
that's the case uh the tendency is for
the war to continue yes
okay okay let's turn our attention
momentarily to the situation in Iran I'd
like to talk about two uh different
streams there the first would be the
protests and then also we could talk
about Iran in relationship to Israel and
also the Iranians nuclear program when I
was in Jerusalem I met with some senior
people
um who'd worked in various ways for the
Israeli government over the years and
some of them were very concerned about
Iran's capacity to move very rapidly
towards the development of a nuclear
bomb and my understanding is that
they're still experimenting quite
heavily with sophisticated centrifuges
that are designed to push them to the
point where developing a nuclear weapon
could take place if necessary within a
few months and and so and it's it it
seems to me to be the case that Iran is
Israel's most fundamental enemy and is
devoted in some real sense to the
eradication of Israel
and
and so that's all extremely uh worrisome
in some sense
um counterbalanced against that is the
fact that the Iranians themselves seem
to be pretty damn sick and tired of
their state and God only knows what's
going to happen as a consequence of the
protests and I mean we could get lucky
possibly and see the Iranian regime
collapse although a collapsed regime is
often replaced by a worse regime
unfortunately rather than a better one
so anyways
tell me your views about Iran uh in
relationship to the U.S in relationship
to Israel in relationship to the ongoing
protests what's happening there as far
as you can tell and what do you see
happening in the future well in the
first place I think that
hostility to the United States and
Israel and more broadly to the West is
baked into the nature of the current
Iranian regime you know and since they
they need a bad relationship with the
United States they need a bad
relationship with Israel how why else do
you justify a clerical dictatorship if
you don't have terrible enemies out
there who are going to destroy you
and they also remember that that Iran is
a multi-ethnic multi-linguistic
multicultural country it has a large
azeri minority in the north it has a lot
of Kurds and the Kurds in Iran are
restless like Kurds in other countries
they want independence for Kurds you've
got Beluga style you've got the blocks
in the in the South you have a large
group of Arabs in Iran and most of the
oil in Iran or a lot of it is in the is
in the part that's inhabited by Arabs
and the the central government wants to
keep pumping the oil but spending the
revenue not on the Arab provinces where
it's come from but to maintain its power
regionally so Iran is is filled with
these ethnic tensions
and you need something to hold a country
like that together and Iran for example
looks at what happens when the Soviet
Union when the Soviet Union lost its
faith in communism so to speak the the
cement that held it together the Soviet
Union fell apart
so the fear in there's a tremendous fear
in the government of Iran that without
an ideology that legitimizes and
empowers Central Authority who knows
what could happen and especially with
other countries whether it's turkey
Russia the United States anybody trying
to pull away at its territories so
that's one reason they're not I think
this whole fantasy that we can reach an
agreement with the Iranians and
everything could be nice was never very
likely but more than that because they
need an enemy well I also think it's
been very convenient for the Iranians to
have Israel as an enemy as well and to
funnel support to the Palestinians and
keep that conflict boiling away madly
because as you said there's nothing that
helps legitimize an authoritarian State
than the presence of obvious malevolent
enemies right so you know one of the
preconditions for peace agreements
obvious is that both sides actually want
peace and that doesn't seem to me at all
obvious as you pointed out in the case
of Iran quite the contrary exactly and
and when it comes to Israel they've got
something else going
you know Iran entertains the fan we've
talked about Iran's fears what are its
hopes the hopes are if a single country
could control the Persian Gulf
and all the oil there
even in this time of oil in other places
and alternative energy that's huge power
globally
you'd sort of blackmail the world
and the Iranians look at the these small
Arab Gulf States many you know 90
percent of the population and some is
foreign workers uh Bahrain has a you
know is a country ruled by Sunni Muslims
but has a law you know has a large Shia
majority there's a rest of Shia minority
in Saudi Arabia so Iran really sees
opportunities and look at what it's been
able to do thanks I think to American
stupidity in Syria but also in Lebanon
Iran is really moving has been moving
across the Middle East it's in Yemen so
um but here's the thing
arrest Shia Islam is not popular among
Sunni Muslims it's uh it's considered a
heresy and and the Persians are are not
really you know the Arab Persian problem
is real
so for to be the most anti-israel is a
way of advertising your credentials I'm
I hate we're such good Muslims that we
hate Israel and unlike all these nasty
Gulf rulers are willing to compromise
and all this we're in this to the death
if you hate Israel you know right you
love Islam we're Your Leader they are
not going to give that up
they are not going to give that up
and if the other Arabs are walking away
from violence among the Palestinians
well the the Iranians would be more than
happy to fill that Gap
so this is right you know this idea that
somehow they're these moderates and you
know they're just ready to make a deal
I'm sure there are moderates in Iran but
the hard core of the power structure I
think sees the logic both in terms of
the fears and the hopes and they don't
see an advantage in changing
we'll be back in one moment first we
wanted to give you a sneak peek at
Jordan's new documentary logos and
literacy
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world illiteracy was
the norm the pastor's home was the first
school and every morning it would begin
with singing the Christian faith is a
singing religion probably 80 percent of
scripture memorization today exists only
because of what is sung this is amazing
here we have a Gutenberg Bible Bible
printed on the Press of Johan goodberg
science and religion are opposing forces
in the world but historically that has
not been the case now the book is
available to everyone from Shakespeare
to modern education and medicine and
science to to civilization itself it is
the most influential book in all history
and hopefully people can walk away with
at least a sense of that
so let's discuss a little bit
um one of the things that struck me I
was reading your book
uh the the latest book um Arc of a
covenant published in 2022 and it's an
analysis at least in large part of the
situation in relationship to Israel and
the Zionist State and Palestine and I
thought that your book was remarkably
even-handed I've been fascinated by the
developments on the Abraham Accord front
I've interviewed a number of people who
are associated with abrahamic Accords
and from what I've been able to
understand what essentially happened was
that a group of people who were
Outsiders in relationship to the foreign
policy establishment decided to Buck
conventional wisdom which was that there
was no possibility for peace between the
Israelites the Israelis and the Arab
world without including the Palestinians
just to do an end run around that and to
start to talk to Arab countries who are
actually interested in well keeping Iran
under control but also in making peace
with the Israel Israelis for strategy
reasons partly because they're a major
military power but also for economic
reasons because so many Arab states are
now looking to differentiate their
economies away from Reliance on the
petrodollar and so what seemed to have
happened with the Abraham Accords was a
very large group of Arab countries
decided that peace with Israel was
definitely in their best interests and
that did circumvent the Palestinians now
I've been pretty uh sympathetic let's
say to the operations of the Israelis in
in the Middle East and I've been
criticized to a large degree for failing
to take into account the oppression of
the Palestinians and your work seems to
be remarkably even-handed in that regard
and you commented just before we started
this interview that you wrote a book on
a very contentious topic and so that
would be the israel-palestinian
situation but you didn't really
contribute to an exacerbation of the
culture war and you really didn't get
pillar read for it and so what that
seems to indicate is that you struck
kind of a nice balance between
advocating on the Jewish side in
relationship to Israel and also pointing
out that by no means a majority of Jews
around the world even support the
Zionist project and also extending a
certain degree of Sympathy for the
displaced Palestinians so maybe you
could could you walk us through your
view of the Abraham Accord
and your view of the situation in Israel
vis-a-vis the Palestinians sure sure let
me start with the with the root the the
israeli-palestinian situation
um
you know it's uh
Americans were actually you know
pro-israel before the Jews were
um non-jewish Americans in in uh in the
1890s before teodor herzl the founder of
modern Zionism had written his book on
the Jewish State uh president United
States got a petition asking him to use
his influence to promote a Jewish state
in Palestine and this petition was
signed by John D Rockefeller J.P Morgan
and the entire sort of American
establishment was on board with this
idea
um and I myself you know thousands of
years of persecution the horrors of the
20th century uh if any people on Earth
need a state and and for that matter
deserve a state surely it's the juice
at the same time
you know the Palestinians are a people
they they became a people in part
because of the struggle with Israel and
with the zionists
um and and they're human beings
um and and human beings have rights and
as an American I I believe in rights and
rights like self-determination so my
hope is still although it's difficult
and complicated that there would be you
know that someday I'd be able to travel
from the Jewish State freely to the
Palestinian State and have friends in
both places that's what I would like to
see now in the book I don't make
recommendations I you know I think right
now it's very hard to get there but
that's what I think most Americans would
like to see and is what I would like to
see
okay so you cite Mark Twain in your book
and let me just see if I can find that
here
um
yes here's a citation from Mark Twain
now see I when I talked to Netanyahu one
of the claims that was put forward on
his part was that before the Zionist
movement the Palestinian territory that
now now Israel was pretty damn desolate
and Abandoned and um the Palestinian
observers of that conversation are very
upset about that characterization
um feeling that it's in the best
interests of the zionists to portray
pre-jewish Palestine as a desolate and
abandoned Wasteland now but you cite let
me read this yet to americanize
the land that the Bible famously
described as flowing with milk and honey
appeared bone dry and deserted in the
19th century and it's handful of it
inhabitants Arabs and Jews seemed deeply
wretched and pray to disease in poverty
Mark Twain in one of his popular travel
columns wrote from Abraham's time till
now Palestine has been peopled only with
ignorant degraded lazy unwashed loafers
and Savages
for Twain and for many Americans the
holy land was wasted on its current
inhabitants whose poor stewardship had
turned the land of King Solomon and King
David into as Twain quipped the most
hopeless dreary heartbroken piece of
territory outside of Arizona now it's
certainly the case that
one of the claims to Israeli legitimacy
in my understanding is the idea that
this was a particularly God forsaken
piece of territory the Ottomans
themselves weren't that interested in
holding on to it it hadn't been utilized
particularly effectively and one of the
consequences of the Zionist Enterprise
is that was once was as an essentially
Barren desert Wasteland has been turned
into an extremely populous and
productive and economically thriving and
blooming country and I have some
sympathy for that viewpoint but then
that leaves that brings into
clear uh Focus the the problematic
elements of that story in relationship
to the Palestinians and so if you were
going to make a case for the
Palestinians vis-a-vis the Israelis if
you would how would you characterize
that in light of these sorts of
descriptions of pre-zionist Palestine
well I don't want to pit them against
each other but I would say that that my
Palestinian friends would say and I
would have some sympathy with this
perspective that you have to remember
that that you know the Palestinians
weren't self-governing in the 19th
century they were part they'd been for
500 years or 400 years of that part of
the Ottoman Empire and so they were
ruled from Istanbul
by and Turks who you know saw the Arabs
more as a cow to be milked than as so
they were they were victims of Ottoman
imperialism then before the British came
and you know that I think would be the
kind of argument that people would make
I would go a little deeper and say
a lot of the um
you know the Redevelopment and the
blooming of Palestine has come about
because of modern techniques of agronomy
and irrigation which no one knew in the
19th century in a sense and you know the
Israelis have really brought I mean
people all over the world are using
their dry farming techniques and their
irrigation techniques and some of their
desalinization and other stuff so they
really have brought something but to
compare a 21st century Israel to a 19th
century Palestine you know it's it's
it's a little tricky as a historical
comparison I think right right right
right so yeah right so you have multiple
problems with that kind of comparison
yeah um the advancement of Technology
being one of them so how many people how
many people are we talking about
inhabiting the place that is now Israel
in the in the say in the late 19th in
the late 19th century again do you know
it's the the estimates vary wildly
because of course again the Ottoman
Empire was not a place where you had
careful statistics
so you don't have every 10 years the
decennial census with an organized
modern Bureau bureaucracy counting the
numbers
so you know what do you how do you
estimate that population you know what's
what is your basis for it and when you
have such a politically contentious
question as Israel Palestine where
everybody's got a point of view
everybody's got an agenda without even
cheating you can find all kinds of ways
to get to different population estimates
for 1890. if you see what I mean so yeah
I I honestly don't think and you know in
all of these one of the things I in Ark
of the Covenant the book I try to make
clear is that in many ways this dispute
between the Israelis and the
Palestinians is one of a hundred such
disputes you know croats and serbs and
the former Yugoslavia
hungarians versus Romanians in
Transylvania they're all these National
disputes and in all of them what you
find is these Scholars and historians
and ideologues they make all kind lines
of claims based on history I I wrote I
was in Romania and somebody said yeah
the magyars they have no place in here
they're Interlopers they only got here
in the 9th Century A.D
which right right to an American that's
not very convincing argument but
um but anyway everybody comes armed with
these battalions of facts that they just
throw each at each other we're not going
to get the solution by sifting
ultimately through those facts you know
that is raking over if you have a
husband and a wife who've quarreled
raking over every quarrel in the
marriage is not actually the way to get
them moving forward
no no no right you need you need
something like a uniting vision no I I
think that's that's a very good point
and I mean part of the reason that there
is conflict
everywhere when there is conflict is
because the facts themselves are open to
question I mean that's almost like the
definition of the precondition for a war
we don't agree what the realities are on
the ground at all and we disagree with
them so vociferously that we can't even
discuss them we have to Now kill each
other and we disagree with with the
rules you know like what what should
adjudicate something is it you know so
so the zionists will say and and their
right to say so the League of Nations
recognized the British mandate over
Palestine as a national home for the
Jews so it's legal the U.N reaffirmed it
in 1948 how much more legal at 47 how
much more legal could that be and a
Palestinian might say well you know the
British were colonial Interlopers who
stole the land from the Ottoman Empire
you know and the Palestinians never had
a voice what gave the League of Nations
the right to say that the British had a
right to the territory that's Imperial
right right right you and and they're
both arguments
um and and people will have different
reasons for supporting them well and
then there's India there's ideological
reasons too I mean there's two things
that you do very masterfully at least in
in this in this book The Ark of the
Covenant
first is I would say you make this
remarkable case which you touched on
earlier that a tremendous amount of
impetus for the Zionist movement wasn't
specifically Jewish it happened to
dovetail with a stream of Christian
evangelism that's probably the right way
to think about it that viewed the
emergence of a Jewish state in the
Middle East as part of the Fulfillment
of biblical prophetic tradition and you
point out as you did with the
Rockefellers for example and with JP
Morgan that there were Zionist movements
on the Christian front that at least
developed in parallel with the Zionist
movement on the Jewish front and in many
places preceded it and so one of the
things I found quite compelling about
your book was the detailing out of the
remarkable and strange support that the
Zionist project found in the Christian
West and so you also point out that if
it was up to the Jews worldwide and they
have a democratic vote let's say with
regards to Israeli policies it's by no
means obvious that the Hawks on the
Israeli side would be the most popular
uh let's say put forward the most
popular Viewpoint in relationship to
what Jews themselves believe and that
there's there's no evidence at all that
what do you call it the Vulcan Planet
Theory it's something like that that the
whole Zionist project is a is the
conspiratorial consequence of of
um of of imperialist Jews and and then
you also make a parallel case which I
really also appreciate so first of all
the Zionist story is much more complex
than the Jews are trying to steal the
Middle East that's for sure but then
there's an ideological issue too which
is that on the radical left in
particular there has developed this
anti-colonial narrative that's
predicated in part on the claim that
every human relationship is predicated
on Power and exploitation and then what
seemed to happen was that that narrative
which accounts let's say for the
colonial activities of of of the
westerners although it's curiously
absent in claims about let's say the
Ottoman Empire is that Israel is just
written into history as another example
of the same thing which is convenient
for people who can only have one
historical idea but doesn't seem to me
to be very much in accordance with the
with the historical process that
actually gave rise to the Israeli State
and if we look at you know again people
you hear all of this people people
talking about how it's sort of Israel is
a European Colonial Venture in the
Middle East it's a white occupation of a
brown country so to speak
and you know certainly the the Zion
herzl and his Zionist movement were
strong among European Jews but the
majority the largest groups in Israel
today are not European uh they're Middle
Eastern Jews many of them were actually
driven out of their homes in the Arab
world in retaliation for what happened
to the Palestinians although these Jews
who'd lived in Iraq for thousands of
years or their ancestors in Egypt and so
on had had nothing to do with either the
Zionist movement or the or the war in
Palestine they were driven from their
homes as refugees and came to Israel and
and these these people sort of get
overlooked in the discussion of and
there were about as many Jewish refugees
from the Arab world more or less and
people obviously argue about all these
numbers and I'm not the great Arbiter of
of everything here but sort comparable
to the number of Palestinians who either
fled or were driven out of Israel in the
time of that war
so it's and and these Jews who were the
supporters by the way that that's the
core of of prime minister netanyahu's
support not the European Jews but the
Middle Eastern Jews and the Russian Jews
who have a different story but these
Jews feel no guilt about the
Palestinians hey he's a refugee I'm a
refugee
but where's the global sympathy for me
where the the Jewish Refugee would say
where is the United Nations with
education for my child and free medical
what have I ever gotten I'm called a
colonizer right a European colonizer
right yeah exactly and then on the other
hand I was I was I visited uh Auschwitz
some years ago and I saw a group of of
group of teenagers following a star of
David flag so I went to see what was
going on they were Jewish teenagers
visiting Poland
because they were actually descended
from polish Jews and they were coming
back to see you know where where their
ancestors had been
and I said well how's the trip been
going and they said well it's not been
so good I said what do you mean I said
well you know we went to visit the
memorial in the Warsaw Ghetto you know
the Jewish resistance against the Nazis
and a crowd of people formed there and
they were yelling Jews go home oh my God
but you know they go to Palestine and
it's ju you know they go back to Israel
and people will say Jews go home to
Poland Poland Jews go home to Palestine
people have to have a home it definitely
seems
um
what would you call it bordering on
malevolent to regard the Jews who
escaped from European persecution into
Israel as European colonizers
I mean you can say what you want about
the British and the Hand they played in
establishing Israel and you can you can
make the case for the Palestinians that
the U.N didn't have the right to do what
it did and there's some there's there's
some credibility to that argument but to
regard European Jews fleeing Nazi
Germany for example or Poland as
European colonizers is I mean Jesus talk
about pan in both directions at the same
time well you know it's also true and
and this is one of the things that in
Ark of the Covenant just sort of I
learned the most about and surprised me
the most it turns out that Stalin had a
lot more to do with the Jewish victory
in the war of independence and the nakpa
the the Exile of the Palestinians then
either the British or the Americans
the the British actually sided with the
Arabs in the Israeli War of Independence
and they armed the Arabs
and the and the Arab forces that were
the most successful were the British
Legion of British trained british-led
British equipped soldiers in the
Jordanian Army uh and they're you know
they're the reasons that the West Bank
was held by the Arabs until the 1967 war
and on the other hand the Americans
while we set all kinds of nice things
about about the Israelis we put on an
arms embargo that that meant that that
the desperate Israelis and for much of
the war they were losing the war and
they were being besieged in Jerusalem
they couldn't buy weapons from the
United States forget about American Aid
to Israel they couldn't even buy with
cash money we put an arms embargo Stalin
ended up selling the through
Czechoslovakia
where the Czech arms Factory the skoda
arms Factory in Czechoslovakia had been
making weapons for the Vermont
and when the Germans surrendered they
had all these Surplus weapons in the
factory
to help the Communists take control of
Czechoslovakia
Stalin allowed the Czech government to
sell these weapons these Nazi swore
Surplus weapons to the Jews and smuggled
them into British controlled
Palestine and it was those weapons that
allowed the Jews to turn the tide in the
war
so you know so to call this an act of
Western colonialism
uh you know this was if any you know
call an act of Soviet colonies and the
reason that Stalin did it okay was
because he believed correctly that the
emergence of a Zionist state in
Palestine would so disrupt the British
relations with the Arabs
that it would it would dramatically
weaken the power of Britain and the
power of the British Empire in the
Middle East he also thought rightly that
it would help drive a wedge between the
U.S and Britain
so the whole story of you know the story
that in people's minds this is the West
imposing something of its Grand
imperialist capitalist Colonial project
it just doesn't match the historical
record
and of course in those days Israel was a
left-wing cause
right right and the Democratic
socialists of America who are now
extremely anti-israel for them in the
1950s Israel was proof that socialism
worked
right whereas Israel's policies were you
saw that with the glorification of the
kibbouses yes exactly and Israel had a
planned economy and the labor unions
were incredibly powerful Israel was far
more left-wing in its Economic Policy
than any even of the Social Democratic
countries in Europe so when people said
oh under socialism there's no Freedom
the Democratic socialists of America say
no Israel shows you're wrong
do you think that part of the reason
that the left has switched its uh
position let's say in relationship to
Israel is because Netanyahu
went to war so to speak against a lot of
these socialist predispositions and
rekindled the Israeli economy towards
something much more approximating a free
market capitalist state yeah it was a
combination of several things and this
was a factor that in the 70s Israel goes
from being a poster child of socialism
to being a poster child of thatcherism
and reaganism
that those were the you know they began
to introduce those economic reforms
which have helped create in particular
the incredibly Dynamic Tech sector that
now gives Israel allies all over the
world and will come to the Abraham
Accords in a minute because this is a
obviously a major factor yeah well
netanyahu's claim is that uh this okay
so he made two claims when I talked to
him and I not only obviously when I
talked to him but one is that he worked
very hard to make Israel a formidable
military power but also worked very hard
to make Israel a formidable capitalist
Enterprise and that it was the
combination of those two things that
enticed or forced let's say the Arab
states that did sign the Abraham Accords
to go along they wanted Israel as an
ally against Iran and so and Israel was
powerful militarily and it showed its
prowess in that regard but also because
the Israeli economy had been freed from
the strictures of an idiot centrally
planned socialism it had become an
industrial and technological Powerhouse
rivaled perhaps now only by Silicon
Valley and that also made the Israelis
very attractive as training Partners to
the Arab states that were interested in
modernizing their economies so that's
netanyahu's pitch what do you think of
it well I think look I think claims
fundamentally this is correct that that
Israel thanks to its economic reforms
but also thanks to some intelligent
state it isn't let's say fair but you
know the state has been very much
involved in promoting its Tech sector
but it is done essentially under
capitalist principles and it's worked
brilliantly and at this and and that
then the tech Investments helped
reinforce the economy overall but also
increase military capability
and this by the way uh is is a little
bit worrying globally in the old days
when you spent money on defense it would
weaken your civilian economy instead of
building a school bus you would build a
tank but increasingly today because so
much defense capability is linked to I.T
Advanced information processing and all
kinds of stuff the sort a lot of that
technology is dual use but also firms
that are excellent in military planning
in military investment are extremely
powerful economically so in fact in in
large defense budgets tend to promote
economic growth rather than restrict it
and that change I think is propelling
the world in a dangerous direction
towards more armed races and that's
something to be genuinely to be
consistent about is it is it propelling
the world to more
you know pseudo-fascist collusion
between large Enterprises at the
Pinnacle of the state well you know it's
well hopefully again this is going to be
one of the tests of the 21st century
it's clear that information and state
power are very closely aligned
and in some ways information is is
becoming the currency of power
and so you you certainly if you're the
United States you don't want Tick Tock
or Huawei to have access to all the data
about your population and of course vice
versa if you're China
so one of the one of the kinds of
fantasies maybe we had in the 1990s was
that the tech Revolution would make
National borders Obsolete and create a
single Global Commons it doesn't look to
me right now as if that's the way things
are working that the tech Revolution May
in fact be recreating blocks and and
strong National entities yeah well I
think I think
I think the idea of a
centralized Global control Elite
and a massive
citizens at their beck and call is the
Tower of Babel model yes you know that
we need right you see this in AI systems
as well for for an AI system to process
information about the world properly it
has to have a very differentiated
hierarchy of distributed computation
there can't just be a centralized
what would you say algorithmic system
operating on the basis of a few
algorithmic principles and then an
undifferentiated massive activity and
the the proper model for governance has
to be something like I think something
like the Catholic principle of
subsidiarity where you have sovereignty
inherent in various strata of the
hierarchical system and that the
hierarchy is quite deep and dense and
differentiated and so the problem with
the globalist view is that there's this
notion that you can have a centralized
cabal that can make relatively simple
centralized decisions and all the power
that should be distributed in all these
subsidiary organizations can be accrued
to the central Authority that just can't
work and so there's going to be a place
for something like Sovereign Nation
States because you want
governance to operate as locally as you
possibly can so you need countries you
need States you need provinces you need
towns you need municipalities you need
families and every single one of those
levels of organization have to be given
their due in with regard to political
and economic power
yes I I have an overwhelming amount of
information isn't going to eliminate
that yeah so that's the problem with the
globalist vision as far as I can tell
what do you think of the Abraham Accords
well I think it's broadly speaking I
think basically
um
in some ways the story that you told I
think is the right Story the thing I
would add you know which is to say that
the
you know the Arabs and the Israelis are
both looking at Iran and by the way down
the road they might be looking at Turkey
because remember the Ottoman Empire
ruled both Palestine and the Arab world
for hundreds of years and as erdogan has
tried to revive this idea of an Islamic
turkey he's made a lot of his neighbors
quite nervous so the sense is well Iran
might be the threat today turkey
tomorrow but yes the Arabs and the
Israelis Now understand that they have a
core strategic interest in common
neither one of them wants any country to
be able to dominate the Middle East
because if any country did
uh it would directly threaten the
independence of both the Arab states and
Israel now they didn't recognize this in
the past because many Arabs had this
dream that there could be an Arab state
that would dominate the Middle East that
was Saddam Hussein's Vision it was
nassar's Vision in his kooky way it was
Gaddafi's Vision but this pan-arabic or
in some cases pan-islamist vision of the
Middle East that is sort of the Arabs
have lost faith in that by and large
and so there is an understanding that
their interests in Israel's interests
are connected in this very geopolitical
way
but at the same time uh you've got the
problem of energy transition the the
gulf Arabs in particular used to think
hey we've got all this oil it's going to
be around forever now they're not so
sure you know will we still be using an
oil-driven economy in a hundred years
Etc and with all of these talks about
carbon neutrality and so on by 2030 2040
whatever year I mean I'm a little
skeptical that all of these things are
going to happen in the in the ways yeah
they're not good they're definitely not
going to happen I mean the Biden
Administration itself has projected that
it'll take till 2240 to produce
something like 100 Reliance on renewable
energy right so these ideas that we're
going to get there by 2050 they're
they're not only Preposterous they're
outright lies right but even so the
Arabs have to figure because on the
other hand they've got fracking and
they've got you know greater competition
from other sources the Arab have to
figure the price of oil their income
from oil over the long term is going to
be trillions of dollars less than they
once thought it would
that there's a long-term downgrade for
income streams from oil and so that
means in a country like Saudi Arabia
where the population is growing and the
government in order to stay in power
needs to keep the people happy in some
way you've got to be thinking about
economic growth well that means you need
technology it means you need investment
it means you you need to have good
relations with the people who are good
at this so there's an economic Dimension
to that as well of real that's new and
that is added now to the Strategic the
third thing though and I think some of
the Americans involved in the Abraham
Accords have not talked about this as
much but it's real is that neither the
Arabs nor the Israelis trust the
Americans as much as they used to
um and it's you know it's partly because
of things like the Iran nuclear deal
that they thought was sacrificing their
interest to America's interests but it's
also you know we elect bush in 2001 then
we'll turn around 180 degrees we elect
Obama then eight years later we turn
around we elect Trump and then four
years later we elect Biden so people in
countries who where America plays a
large role in their security they have
to think harder than before about well
we don't know who the Americans are
going to elect in 2024. will it be
Elizabeth Warren will it be Donald Trump
again you know they have no idea what
we'll do and frankly we don't either
so um so they that means that they have
to work together more so
American weakness actually helped push
the Abraham Accords
so one of the disappointments
um that I've
experienced in relationship to the Biden
Administration was what I saw as their
ideologically motivated rejection of the
advances made on the Abraham Accord
front from what I've been able to
understand the Saudis were playing a
large role behind the scenes in pushing
the Abraham Accords forward and it seems
to me that had the Biden Administration
gone to the Saudis with an attitude that
would have unfortunately also allowed
Trump to claim some credit for the
Abraham Accords if this Biden
administration had gone to the Saudis
with with open arms in some sense that
they might have been the next
signatories for the Abraham Accords and
it looked to me like the Biden
Administration let an extremely
narrow-minded parochial ideological view
of both Trump and the situation in the
Middle East
Scuttle and unbelievably promising
opportunity not only on the Peace front
but I mean the Americans were also very
much interested in getting their hands
on some additional Saudi oil which they
seem to have failed out dismally and
then had to turn to you know lovely
lovely regimes like Venezuela so what do
you think is going on with regards to
the Biden Administration and the Saudis
in relationship to the Abraham Accords
well you know this is this is a really
interesting story and it's a complicated
one but I'll tell it as simply as I can
which is that the Democratic party has
been basically hating Saudi Arabia for
70 years
um the last Democrat who really sort of
likes the Saudis was Franklin D
Roosevelt who visited in 1944 but
um during the 1950s Democrats actually
hated the Saudis in general because they
were very pro-israel at the time and
they saw the Eisenhower Administration
which tilted toward Nassar and in
general toward the Arabs well this is
you're preferring a bunch of evil feudal
monarchs over Democratic Israel because
you want the oil and the oil monopolies
right are your friends so to be a good
liberal Democrat was to hate the Saudis
and hate Eisenhower for liking them then
you come to OPEC you know the 1970s and
now you have the oil cartel I think
we've been protecting you from the
Soviet Union and your enemies and you
turn on us and you're jacking up the
price yeah and at that time sort of
working class America was basically
Democratic and the price of oil triple
at a time when people getting like 10
miles a gallon in a car and it was
wrecking people's lives and it was the
Saudis who were doing it then you add
sort of you know then
um 911 comes along and there were the
Saudis but plus the Saudis were friends
of the bushes the Bush family had a long
connection with the Saudi royal family
obviously Hanky Panky is at work it's
the evil it's the evil
then now on top of all of that comes oil
and the greenhouse gases the Saudis are
destroying the world because they're
pumping all that oil into the atmosphere
and any good relationship with the
Saudis is is sort of bowing the knee to
Big oil into the destruction of human
life through climate change I'm
exaggerating but you can see what I mean
right right well you also saw widespread
Saudi support for the wahhabis as well
and they're they're drug beating on
behalf of a pretty damn restrictive form
of of fundamentalist Islam exactly but
it looked to me like so so okay so
that's a perfect storm but it still
looked to me like the American choice in
the last five years was something like
well
is it Iran
or is it the Saudis and the Israelis
right and it seems to me that despite
the sins of the Saudis which are
manifold the idea that they're not
preferable to the Iranians is a form of
political Insanity well I think we also
need to throw in a factor here which is
you know there's been a huge Scandal
recently about Qatari influence in the
European parliaments uh where they've
actually arrested the vice president of
the former vice president of European
Parliament and so on and so forth
um there the qataris are very anti-saudi
they've had a huge fight with the Saudis
in recent years they also have a kind of
a softer relationship with Iran
they are heavily and you know heavily
involved in the Washington policy
Network the head of a major Think Tank
sort of got into big trouble because of
a relationship so there's a sense in
which you know I right all sides in the
Gulf with a lot of money are put
themselves into Washington politics and
acquire networks of allies let's just
say
so there's and and the Democratic side
of the spectrum is more aligned with
soft on Iran uh uh uh
pro-democracy is a little bit tilting
toward the Muslim Brotherhood again I'm
not saying everybody does this but if
you watch Washington politics you can
see some threads moving forward okay
what but what what in the world is the
rationale for being soft on a rat
I don't see a rationale for that at all
I mean Iran is a terrible repressive
theocracy with nuclear ambition it's a
dangerous regime so how can you be soft
on Iran well okay may I may I call you
Jordan by the way or Mr Peterson you you
certainly may all right well I and I'm
Walter by the way it's after two hours I
think we should but I think we could do
that
um but I think that uh look
if you believe and a whole generation
has come to believe uh in the U.S and
not entirely for bad reasons like the
Iraq War was the worst mistake America
has made in the 21st century people
would say that and a war with Iran would
be even worse than a war than the war in
Iraq and it's very easy to start a war
with Iran but once it's going on you
know it'll suck a dry it'll divert us
from China the Middle East will be a
flame etc etc so your number and and
furthermore we got to get out of the
Middle East and think about China Okay
so
what's the biggest danger what is the
biggest way you easiest way to get into
a war in the Middle East it would be a
confrontation with Iran therefore you
can't have a confrontation with Iran
that's the way I think a lot of people
are thinking and I think you know and
they're saying and they will say and now
I'm you know I I can't tell you this is
what they think because they can't read
their minds but I think the logic of the
position is we have to say we don't want
an Iranian nuclear weapon but actually
if you're given a binary choice between
a war with Iran with the U.S fighting
Iran to keep it from being not nuclear
and then or just hoping that if they get
a nuclear weapon we can deter them and
Israel can deter them like everybody
else's with nuclear weapons has been
deterred they would say better let them
have the bomb than have the War I think
that's the the logic of the position and
that the Iranians smelling that as the
logic of the position have taken a very
tough line in negotiations and at this
point our con are continuing to press
the Biden Administration that's what I
think is probably happening okay okay
we've wandered over a lot of territory
we talked about China we talked about
Russia we talked about Iran we talked
about the Abraham Accords we talked
about the complexities of the
israel-palestinian situation so we've
covered a lot of the territory I was
hoping we would cover is there anything
that is remaining that you'd like to
bring people's attention to
well you know they're there's been such
a there's been a great conversation I
really enjoyed it um and we've touched
on so many things I guess I would like
to close by giving a bit of a reason for
optimism for folks because you know the
world situation is grim and there's
there is real danger of War
but this anglo-american 300 year old
system of a kind of a commercial
capitalist Global liberal framework
it it it it doesn't just stay there by
accident there are solid reasons why the
world order that we've known you know we
it's possible that it can continue
lasting who knows how long but they're
forces that prop it up one of them and
we've talked about this sum is that a
diversified Society with capitalist
principles actually is incredibly
creative and vital and keeps coming up
with new technologies New Economic
productivity new ideas new institutions
that enable it to continually adjust to
changing conditions and that gives it
tremendous advantages over people who
try to follow other systems or other
approaches the other Advantage is
geopolitical see America is a sea power
you know we are we're not trying we
don't we don't have any interest in
conquering France
much as much as there's some really nice
places in France we we're you know we
don't you know we Occupied Japan after
World War II but we got out we did not
want to stay and you know so that but on
the on the contrary land powers like the
Soviet Union keeps they keep expanding
and they want to dominate their
neighbors in a way that a sea power just
isn't going to do so when a country like
Russia or Iran or China begins to
threaten its neighbors they all want to
be allies of ours
so as China has become more threatening
we can see how Japan is suddenly either
doubling their defense budget they are
deepening their relations with Australia
with India you know they're really
working very hard to build the alliance
the Indians are waking up and getting
very geopolitically active so this the
the Abraham Accords pop up in the Middle
East the polls and the baltics are
committed you know the swedes and the
Finns want to join NATO so when this
system is threatened by ambitious big
Powers the other powers organize into
alliances and this is not new this is
how Britain defeated Louis XIV in the 16
and early 17th century it's how the
British were able to defeat Napoleon
it's what brought down Kaiser Wilhelm in
World War one it's what brought down
Hitler and Tojo in World War II and it's
what defeated the Soviet Union
so there are things on our side and we
need the courage and the vision and
maybe even a little bit of the knowledge
of history that can help us understand
and assess these incredibly threatening
and dramatic Trends in world history
that we're living through
well I think that's an excellent way of
ending this on that optimistic note yes
I do think that the principles upon
which this lengthy anglo-american
productive piece have been predicated
are Rock Solid particularly compared to
all known Alternatives and it is useful
for us in the west to observe that and
to take heart in it and also to
understand that the degree to the degree
that those fundamental principles have
spread across the world what they've
primarily produced in their aftermath is
unparalleled productivity and abundance
and peace and so we could we could have
more of that and I also think that
that's within our grasp so that's a nice
optimistic projection for 2023 and
hopefully calm and stable and wise heads
will prevail thank you very much for
talking we to me today and to all of you
who are watching on YouTube or listening
on the associated podcast platforms
thank you for your time and attention
I'm going to turn now for an additional
half an hour to the Daily wire plus
platform I'm going to talk to Mr Walter
Russell Mead about his biographical
progress I'm very interested in
delineating out the particulars of
successful people's lives
um it's always it always makes an
interesting story and I think it's
useful for people to understand how a
productive Destiny makes itself manifest
across a life course and so that's what
we're going to do thank you to the Daily
wire plus people for facilitating this
conversation and uh Happy New Year to
all of you who are watching and
listening thanks again Walter for the
conversation today
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com